OpenClaus memory is a total junk drawer
that is costing you money. I'm a
software engineer and here's how I fixed
it. The default setup dumps everything
into one massive memory file which
confuses the agent and bloat your API
bill. So, here's the deal. When your
agent reads one giant file for every
request, you burn through tokens and the
bot gets confused. Most people just seem
to kind of accept this. Um, they repaste
context and reexplain their project.
They waste tokens repeating themselves
in every single session. But it doesn't
have to be this way. Today, I'm going to
show you four methods to give your open
claw agent real persistent memory. From
the dead simple to the seriously
powerful and the last method is one that
most people don't even know that
openclaw is capable of. Before we get
into the methods, let's quickly
understand why this is a problem in the
first place. Openclaw agents and really
any LLM based agent operates within a
context window. Think of it like
short-term memory. Whatever is in that
window, the agent can see, but the
second a session ends, that window
closes. The context of that conversation
is gone. Now, for a one-off
conversation, that's fine. But if you're
using Open Claw, the way it's meant to
be used as an ongoing collaborator, a
coding partner, a research assistant,
you need to remember things between
sessions. Things like what project
you're working on, your preferences,
decisions you've made already, data it's
already gathered. So, here are four ways
to solve this, starting with the one you
can set up in about 60 seconds. Method
one is the simplest and honestly it's
underrated. These are structured memory
folders. So here's the idea. You create
a dedicated folder structure in your
project directory or wherever your
agents operate specifically designed to
store contexts that persist between
sessions. I like to set mine up with a
main memory folder at the root level,
then a projects folder in the agents
workspace. Inside that, a project
context folder with files like goals.md,
decisions.md, and current status.md.
Then a preferences folder with coding
style.md and communication
preferences.mmd. And finally a
knowledgebased folder with research
notes.md and reference.mmd. Now here's
the key. You don't just create these
folders. You instruct the agent to use
them in your custom instructions or
system prompt. You tell your open cloud
agent at the end of every session update
the relevant files in the memory folder.
That's it. That's the whole trick. Now
is this sophisticated? No. Is it vector
database with semantic search?
Absolutely not. But here's why I love
it. One, it's totally transparent. You
can operate those markdown files and see
exactly what your agent remembers. No
blackbox. Two, it works with any LLM
provider, Anthropic, OpenAI, local
models. It doesn't really matter. It's
just files. And three, you control the
structure. You decide what's important
enough to remember. And that kind of
intentional memory design actually leads
to better results than just dumping
everything into a database and hoping
the retrieval will work. For most
people, especially if you're just
getting started, this is method one.
Method two is something a lot of people
don't realize exists or they try it and
it doesn't really work and they don't
understand why. Let's clear this up.
Open Claw has a built-in memory search
function called memory search. It's
designed to let your agent search
through stored memories, past
conversations, save context, things
you've told it to remember. And when it
works, it's slick. You can say,
"Remember that I prefer TypeScript over
JavaScript." Or, "Remember that the
database schema uses unique primary IDs
as keys." and later your agent can
search for and retrieve those memories.
But, and this is the part that trips
people up, memory search requires the
OpenAI, Gemini, or Voyage API to
function and it's turned off by default.
So, you need to enable it. It doesn't
work with your Anthropic Key and I'm
going to say that again because I get
questions about this constantly. Memory
Search uses OpenAI, Gemini, or Voyages
embedding models under the hood. So, if
you're only running Anthropics Claude as
your LLM provider, which let's be
honest, a lot of OpenCloud users are
memory search will silently fail or just
not work at all. You won't always get a
clear error message. Your agent will
just not remember things and you'll be
sitting there wondering what you did
wrong. So, here's what you need to do.
Even if claude is your primary model for
conversations, you need an open AAI API
key, a voyage API key or a Gemini API
key configured in your OpenClaw setup
specifically for the embedding that
layer that powers memory search. Go into
your open call settings, find the API
configuration section, and make sure you
have a valid OpenAI API key, Voyage API
key, or Gemini API key. It doesn't have
to be your main model. It's just used
for the embedding and search
functionality behind memory search.
Next, tell OpenClaw to enable memory
search and to use the model you added.
Once that's in place, memory should work
as expected. Your agent can now store
and retrieve memories with natural
language queries. Now, the cost on this
is minimal. Embedding calls are very
cheap. We're talking fractions of a
scent. So, don't let the I need another
API key thing scare you off, but you do
need to know. It's a requirement because
nothing in the UI really tells you this
upfront. If method one was the manual
but reliable approach, method two is the
built-in but needs proper setup
approach. This will be a great solution
for most users once you're clear that
you need those specific API keys in
order for it to work. Okay, now we're
getting into the more complicated but
more comprehensive solutions. Method
three is for those of you who want real
persistent intelligent long-term memory
and it comes from a third party plugin
called MEM0. MEM0 is purpose-built to
solve the exact problem we've been
talking about. and it does it in a way
that's honestly kind of elegant. The
plugin is called at mem0/openclaw-mem0.
And here's what it does in plain
English. It adds long-term memory to
OpenClaw agents. Your agents forget
things between sessions. And this
plug-in fixes that by automatically
watching conversations, extracting what
matters, and bringing it back when
relevant. Let's break down what's
happening under the hood. Because this
is where it gets pretty cool. MEM0 uses
vector search. If you're not familiar, a
vector database stores information not
as exact text matches, but as
mathematical representations of meaning.
So when your agent needs to recall
something, it's not doing a keyword
search like F. It's doing a semantic
search. That means if you told your
agent 3 weeks ago, our client prefers a
minimalist design approach. And today
you ask about design direction, MEM0
will surface that memory even though you
use completely different words. The
plug-in works by doing three things
automatically. Step one, it watches
every conversation you have with your
OpenClaw agent. Um, MEMM0 is observing
in the background. Step two, it extract
it identifies the information that
actually matters, preferences,
decisions, facts, project details and
then stores them as vector embeddings.
Step three, it retrieves at the start of
each conversation or whenever context is
relevant, it pulls back the right
memories and injects them into your
agents context. And it does this all
automatically. No manual work from you.
So, compare this to method one with
structured folders. You decide what to
save and you design the retrieval. With
MEM0, the system is doing the heavy
lifting for you. Now, the trade-off is
that it's a third party dependency.
You're adding a plug-in. You're
potentially sending data through MEM0's
infrastructure. So, read their privacy
docs if that matters to you. And like
any automated system, it might
occasionally service irrelevant memories
or miss something you wanted it to
catch. But for most users who want a set
it and forget it memory solution. MEM0
is the move. Once it's installed and
configured, you literally just use Open
Claw. Normally, MEM0 handles the rest.
Have a conversation today. Close the
session, come back tomorrow, and your
agent actually remembers what happened.
All right, method four. This is the one
I'm the most excited about, and it's the
one almost nobody is talking about. You
can ask your OpenClaw agent to store
dense structured information in a SQL
light database, which it natively has
access to. So, let me say that again.
OpenClaw can natively read from and
write to a SQL light database. You don't
need a plugin. You don't need an extra
API key. It's just there. Why is this a
big deal? Because methods 1 through
three are great for conversational
memory, preferences, decisions, general
context. But what about when you're
working with dense structured data?
Think about hundreds of API endpoints
you need documented, a product catalog,
customer records, research data with
dozens of fields, financial figures
across multiple quarters. Markdown files
will fall apart with that kind of data.
Vector search is great for fuzzy
retrieval, but sometimes you need exact
queries. Show me every API endpoint that
uses post and requires authentication.
That's a SQL query. And SQL is really
good at that. Here's how this works in
practice. You say to your opencloud
agent, I need you to create a SQL light
database to track all the API endpoints
in our project. Store the endpoint path,
HTTP method, authentication requirement,
rate limit, and a description for each
one. Then your agent will create the
database, define the schema, and start
populating it. You can then query it
naturally like how many endpoints
require authentication, show me all get
endpoints related to user management,
and your agent translates that into SQL,
runs it, and gives you the answer. You
can then query it naturally by saying
something like how many endpoints
require authentication? Show me all get
endpoints related to user management and
your agent translates that into SQL runs
it and gives you the answer. Now here's
where it gets really powerful. You can
combine this with the other methods. Use
structure folders for highle project
context and preferences. Use mem for
conversational memory between sessions.
and use SQL light for any dense
structured data that needs precise
querying. That's a full memory
architecture. Your agent has short-term
memory from the context window,
medium-term memory from MEM0, and memory
search and a long-term structured data
store in SQL Lite. You've essentially
built a brain. And because SQL Lite is
just a file, a single DB file, it's
portable, it's persistent, and it
survives session resets. You can even
version control it if you want. The key
thing to understand is this. You're not
limited to one memory method. The best
open cloth setups I've seen use two or
three of these together, each handling a
different type of information. Okay, so
let's bring this all together. Four
methods, each with a sweet spot. Method
one, structured memory folders. Best for
getting started fast. Full transparency
works with any LLM. Method two, memory
search. Best for quick natural language
recall with OpenClaw. Just remember you
need OpenAI, Gemini, or Voyage API key,
even if you're using Claude. And method
three, MEM0 plugin. Best for automated
long-term search conversational memory
with zero maintenance. Uh the set it and
forget it option. And method four SQL
light database best for dense structured
data that needs precise queries. This is
the power user move. My recommendation
is to start with method one today. Takes
about 5 minutes. Then add MEM0 or SQL
light depending on your use case. And
make sure memory search is properly
configured with the correct API key. If
you got value from this, hit subscribe.
I'm putting out open claw content that
goes way beyond the surface level. And
if you want to go even deeper, I run a
community over on school where we share
custom setups, configurations, and help
each other build better agents. Link is
in the description. I will also include
a link with more information on the
setup in the description. If there's a
specific method you want me to do a
dedicated deep dive on, drop it in the
comments. I'll see you in the next one.